---
author:
- Lizzie Wheeldon
- Alan M. Lewis
title: 'Workshop 1: Fractions, Powers and Inequalities'
---

Non-Integer Numbers
===================

There are three usual ways of writing numbers which are not integers
(whole numbers): fractions, percentages and decimals. For more details
about how to handle these numbers and examples of how they are used in
Chemistry, see sections 1.3, 1.4 and 1.5 of this [Maths for Chemists
document](https://edu.rsc.org/download?ac=15395).

Fractions
---------

-   Fractions can be thought of as the ratio between two numbers, or
    simply as the result of dividing one number by another:
    $\frac{a}{b} \equiv a \div b$.

-   Fractions can be multiplied by multiplying the numerators and
    denominators. Division is the inverse of multiplication, and so
    dividing by a fraction is the same as multiplying by the inverse of
    that fraction:
    $$\frac{a}{b} \times \frac{c}{d}  = \frac{ a \times c}{b \times d}; \qquad \frac{a}{b} \div \frac{c}{d} = \frac{a}{b} \times \frac{d}{c} = \frac{ a \times d} {b \times c}$$

-   Fractions can only be added or subtracted if they have the same
    denominator. To change the denominator of a fraction, multiply the
    numerator and denominator by the same amount (this is the same as
    multiplying by 1, which does not change the number). For example:
    $$\frac{2}{7} - \frac{3}{5} = \left(\frac{2}{7} \times \frac{5}{5} \right)- \left(\frac{3}{5} \times \frac{7}{7}\right) = \frac{10}{35} - \frac{21}{35} = \frac{-11}{35}$$

Percentages
-----------

-   Percentages are numbers which are fractions of 100:
    $x \% = \frac{x}{100}$.

-   Any fraction can be written as a percentage:
    $\frac{a}{b} = (a \div b \times 100) \%$

-   The percentage of a quantity is calculated by: $x$% of $y$ =
    $x \times y \div 100$.

Decimals
--------

-   Many fractions cannot be written exactly as decimals (e.g
    $\frac{1}{6} = 0.166666\cdots$).

-   Decimals should be rounded to a certain number of decimal places
    (d.p., numbers after the decimal point) or significant figures
    (s.f., numbers after the first number which is not zero). For
    example, 0.00123456 to 4 s.f. is 0.001234, and to 4 d.p. is 0.0012.

Powers
======

Below is a summary of the key rules for understanding and manipulating
powers. More details about powers and examples of how they are used in
Chemistry are in sections 2.1 of this [Maths for Chemists
document](https://edu.rsc.org/download?ac=15395).

2

$x^n = x \times x \times x \cdots (n \text{ times})$

$x^{-n} = \frac{1}{x^n}$

$\sqrt{x} = x^{1/2}$

$\sqrt[3]{x} = x^{1/3}$

$x^a \times x^b = x^{(a+b)}$

$\frac{x^a}{x^b} = x^{(a-b)}$

$(x^a)^b = x^{a \times b}$

Inequalities
============

Inequalities indicate when some information about a variable is known,
but it cannot be specified precisely. The four most common inequalities
are greater than ($>$), less than ($<$), greater than or equal to
($\geq$), and less than or equal to ($\leq$). The difference between
these pair is whether the limit is an allowed value of the variable: if
$x > 3$, then $x$ can be any value greater than 3, but not equal to 3;
if $x \geq 3$, then $x=3$ is an allowed value of $x$. We can also write
two different inequalities for a single variable: $0 < x < 1$ means that
x must be between 0 and 1, and cannot be equal to either zero or 1.

We can also use inequalities to show when one variable is much larger
than another, using $\gg$ or $\ll$. These are usually used to show that
the smaller of these numbers can effectively be ignored for the
particular calculation we are doing, especially if those two numbers are
going to be added together. For example, imagine we want to calculate
the force which acts on a bowling ball when it falls under gravity. We
can use the equation $F=ma$, and we know the mass of the bowling ball is
7.3 kg, and that acceleration under gravity on earth is 9.8 m s$^{-2}$,
so the force acting on the ball must be 71.5 N. Now imagine sticking a
piece of chewing gum to the bowling ball, and redoing the calculation.
If the mass of the bowling ball is $m_1$, and the mass of the chewing
gum is $m_2$, then the total mass is $m = m_1 + m_2$. But the chewing
gum is much lighter than the bowling ball ($m_2 \ll m_1$), so we can say
that the total weight is approximately the same as the weight of the
bowling ball ($m \approx m_1$), and so the answer must be approximately
the same. Check for yourself how different the force will be if the
chewing gum weighs 1 g. Whether this difference matters will depend on
the type of experiment we are trying to do.
